Idle reader: thou mayest believe me without any oath that I would this
book, as it is the child of my brain, were the fairest, gayest, and
cleverest that could be imagined. But I could not counteract Nature's
law that everything shall beget its like; and what, then, could this
sterile, illtilled wit of mine beget but the story of a dry,
shrivelled, whimsical offspring, full of thoughts of all sorts and such
as never came into any other imagination—just what might be begotten in
a prison, where every misery is lodged and every doleful sound makes
its dwelling? Tranquillity, a cheerful retreat, pleasant fields, bright
skies, murmuring brooks, peace of mind, these are the things that go
far to make even the most barren muses fertile, and bring into the
world births that fill it with wonder and delight. Sometimes when a
father has an ugly, loutish son, the love he bears him so blindfolds
his eyes that he does not see his defects, or, rather, takes them for
gifts and charms of mind and body, and talks of them to his friends as
wit and grace. I, however—for though I pass for the father, I am but
the stepfather to "Don Quixote"—have no desire to go with the current
of custom, or to implore thee, dearest reader, almost with tears in my
eyes, as others do, to pardon or excuse the defects thou wilt perceive
in this child of mine. Thou art neither its kinsman nor its friend, thy
soul is thine own and thy will as free as any man's, whate'er he be,
thou art in thine own house and master of it as much as the king of his
taxes and thou knowest the common saying, "Under my cloak I kill the
king;" all which exempts and frees thee from every consideration and
obligation, and thou canst say what thou wilt of the story without fear
of being abused for any ill or rewarded for any good thou mayest say of
it.
My wish would be simply to present it to thee plain and unadorned,
without any embellishment of preface or uncountable muster of customary
sonnets, epigrams, and eulogies, such as are commonly put at the
beginning of books. For I can tell thee, though composing it cost me
some labour, I found none greater than the making of this Preface thou
art now reading. Many times did I take up my pen to write it, and many
did I lay it down again, not knowing what to write. One of these times,
as I was pondering with the paper before me, a pen in my ear, my elbow
on the desk, and my cheek in my hand, thinking of what I should say,
there came in unexpectedly a certain lively, clever friend of mine,
who, seeing me so deep in thought, asked the reason; to which I, making
no mystery of it, answered that I was thinking of the Preface I had to
make for the story of "Don Quixote," which so troubled me that I had a
mind not to make any at all, nor even publish the achievements of so
noble a knight.
"For, how could you expect me not to feel uneasy about what that
ancient lawgiver they call the Public will say when it sees me, after
slumbering so many years in the silence of oblivion, coming out now
with all my years upon my back, and with a book as dry as a rush,
devoid of invention, meagre in style, poor in thoughts, wholly wanting
in learning and wisdom, without quotations in the margin or annotations
at the end, after the fashion of other books I see, which, though all
fables and profanity, are so full of maxims from Aristotle, and Plato,
and the whole herd of philosophers, that they fill the readers with
amazement and convince them that the authors are men of learning,
erudition, and eloquence. And then, when they quote the Holy
Scriptures!—anyone would say they are St. Thomases or other doctors of
the Church, observing as they do a decorum so ingenious that in one
sentence they describe a distracted lover and in the next deliver a
devout little sermon that it is a pleasure and a treat to hear and
read. Of all this there will be nothing in my book, for I have nothing
to quote in the margin or to note at the end, and still less do I know
what authors I follow in it, to place them at the beginning, as all do,
under the letters A, B, C, beginning with Aristotle and ending with
Xenophon, or Zoilus, or Zeuxis, though one was a slanderer and the
other a painter. Also my book must do without sonnets at the beginning,
at least sonnets whose authors are dukes, marquises, counts, bishops,
ladies, or famous poets. Though if I were to ask two or three obliging
friends, I know they would give me them, and such as the productions of
those that have the highest reputation in our Spain could not equal.
"In short, my friend," I continued, "I am determined that Señor Don
Quixote shall remain buried in the archives of his own La Mancha until
Heaven provide someone to garnish him with all those things he stands
in need of; because I find myself, through my shallowness and want of
learning, unequal to supplying them, and because I am by nature shy and
careless about hunting for authors to say what I myself can say without
them. Hence the cogitation and abstraction you found me in, and reason
enough, what you have heard from me."
Hearing this, my friend, giving himself a slap on the forehead and
breaking into a hearty laugh, exclaimed, "Before God, Brother, now am I
disabused of an error in which I have been living all this long time I
have known you, all through which I have taken you to be shrewd and
sensible in all you do; but now I see you are as far from that as the
heaven is from the earth. It is possible that things of so little
moment and so easy to set right can occupy and perplex a ripe wit like
yours, fit to break through and crush far greater obstacles? By my
faith, this comes, not of any want of ability, but of too much
indolence and too little knowledge of life. Do you want to know if I am
telling the truth? Well, then, attend to me, and you will see how, in
the opening and shutting of an eye, I sweep away all your difficulties,
and supply all those deficiencies which you say check and discourage
you from bringing before the world the story of your famous Don
Quixote, the light and mirror of all knight-errantry."
"Say on," said I, listening to his talk; "how do you propose to make up
for my diffidence, and reduce to order this chaos of perplexity I am
in?"
To which he made answer, "Your first difficulty about the sonnets,
epigrams, or complimentary verses which you want for the beginning, and
which ought to be by persons of importance and rank, can be removed if
you yourself take a little trouble to make them; you can afterwards
baptise them, and put any name you like to them, fathering them on
Prester John of the Indies or the Emperor of Trebizond, who, to my
knowledge, were said to have been famous poets: and even if they were
not, and any pedants or bachelors should attack you and question the
fact, never care two maravedis for that, for even if they prove a lie
against you they cannot cut off the hand you wrote it with.
"As to references in the margin to the books and authors from whom you
take the aphorisms and sayings you put into your story, it is only
contriving to fit in nicely any sentences or scraps of Latin you may
happen to have by heart, or at any rate that will not give you much
trouble to look up; so as, when you speak of freedom and captivity, to
insert
_Non bene pro toto libertas venditur auro;_
and then refer in the margin to Horace, or whoever said it; or, if you
allude to the power of death, to come in with—
_Pallida mors æquo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas,
Regumque turres._
"If it be friendship and the love God bids us bear to our enemy, go at
once to the Holy Scriptures, which you can do with a very small amount
of research, and quote no less than the words of God himself: _Ego
autem dico vobis: diligite inimicos vestros._ If you speak of evil
thoughts, turn to the Gospel: _De corde exeunt cogitationes malæ._ If
of the fickleness of friends, there is Cato, who will give you his
distich:
_Donec eris felix multos numerabis amicos,
Tempora si fuerint nubila, solus eris._
"With these and such like bits of Latin they will take you for a
grammarian at all events, and that now-a-days is no small honour and
profit.
"With regard to adding annotations at the end of the book, you may
safely do it in this way. If you mention any giant in your book
contrive that it shall be the giant Goliath, and with this alone, which
will cost you almost nothing, you have a grand note, for you can
put—_The giant Golias or Goliath was a Philistine whom the shepherd
David slew by a mighty stone-cast in the Terebinth valley, as is
related in the Book of Kings_—in the chapter where you find it written.
"Next, to prove yourself a man of erudition in polite literature and
cosmography, manage that the river Tagus shall be named in your story,
and there you are at once with another famous annotation, setting
forth—_The river Tagus was so called after a King of Spain: it has its
source in such and such a place and falls into the ocean, kissing the
walls of the famous city of Lisbon, and it is a common belief that it
has golden sands_, etc. If you should have anything to do with robbers,
I will give you the story of Cacus, for I have it by heart; if with
loose women, there is the Bishop of Mondonedo, who will give you the
loan of Lamia, Laida, and Flora, any reference to whom will bring you
great credit; if with hard-hearted ones, Ovid will furnish you with
Medea; if with witches or enchantresses, Homer has Calypso, and Virgil
Circe; if with valiant captains, Julius Cæsar himself will lend you
himself in his own ‘Commentaries,' and Plutarch will give you a
thousand Alexanders. If you should deal with love, with two ounces you
may know of Tuscan you can go to Leon the Hebrew, who will supply you
to your heart's content; or if you should not care to go to foreign
countries you have at home Fonseca's ‘Of the Love of God,' in which is
condensed all that you or the most imaginative mind can want on the
subject. In short, all you have to do is to manage to quote these
names, or refer to these stories I have mentioned, and leave it to me
to insert the annotations and quotations, and I swear by all that's
good to fill your margins and use up four sheets at the end of the
book.
"Now let us come to those references to authors which other books have,
and you want for yours. The remedy for this is very simple: You have
only to look out for some book that quotes them all, from A to Z as you
say yourself, and then insert the very same alphabet in your book, and
though the imposition may be plain to see, because you have so little
need to borrow from them, that is no matter; there will probably be
some simple enough to believe that you have made use of them all in
this plain, artless story of yours. At any rate, if it answers no other
purpose, this long catalogue of authors will serve to give a surprising
look of authority to your book. Besides, no one will trouble himself to
verify whether you have followed them or whether you have not, being no
way concerned in it; especially as, if I mistake not, this book of
yours has no need of any one of those things you say it wants, for it
is, from beginning to end, an attack upon the books of chivalry, of
which Aristotle never dreamt, nor St. Basil said a word, nor Cicero had
any knowledge; nor do the niceties of truth nor the observations of
astrology come within the range of its fanciful vagaries; nor have
geometrical measurements or refutations of the arguments used in
rhetoric anything to do with it; nor does it mean to preach to anybody,
mixing up things human and divine, a sort of motley in which no
Christian understanding should dress itself. It has only to avail
itself of truth to nature in its composition, and the more perfect the
imitation the better the work will be. And as this piece of yours aims
at nothing more than to destroy the authority and influence which books
of chivalry have in the world and with the public, there is no need for
you to go a-begging for aphorisms from philosophers, precepts from Holy
Scripture, fables from poets, speeches from orators, or miracles from
saints; but merely to take care that your style and diction run
musically, pleasantly, and plainly, with clear, proper, and well-placed
words, setting forth your purpose to the best of your power, and
putting your ideas intelligibly, without confusion or obscurity.
Strive, too, that in reading your story the melancholy may be moved to
laughter, and the merry made merrier still; that the simple shall not
be wearied, that the judicious shall admire the invention, that the
grave shall not despise it, nor the wise fail to praise it. Finally,
keep your aim fixed on the destruction of that ill-founded edifice of
the books of chivalry, hated by some and praised by many more; for if
you succeed in this you will have achieved no small success."
In profound silence I listened to what my friend said, and his
observations made such an impression on me that, without attempting to
question them, I admitted their soundness, and out of them I determined
to make this Preface; wherein, gentle reader, thou wilt perceive my
friend's good sense, my good fortune in finding such an adviser in such
a time of need, and what thou hast gained in receiving, without
addition or alteration, the story of the famous Don Quixote of La
Mancha, who is held by all the inhabitants of the district of the Campo
de Montiel to have been the chastest lover and the bravest knight that
has for many years been seen in that neighbourhood. I have no desire to
magnify the service I render thee in making thee acquainted with so
renowned and honoured a knight, but I do desire thy thanks for the
acquaintance thou wilt make with the famous Sancho Panza, his squire,
in whom, to my thinking, I have given thee condensed all the squirely
drolleries that are scattered through the swarm of the vain books of
chivalry. And so—may God give thee health, and not forget me. Vale.
SOME COMMENDATORY VERSES
URGANDA THE UNKNOWN
To the book of Don Quixote of la Mancha
If to be welcomed by the good,
O Book! thou make thy steady aim,
No empty chatterer will dare
To question or dispute thy claim.
But if perchance thou hast a mind
To win of idiots approbation,
Lost labour will be thy reward,
Though they'll pretend appreciation.
They say a goodly shade he finds
Who shelters 'neath a goodly tree;
And such a one thy kindly star
In Bejar bath provided thee:
A royal tree whose spreading boughs
A show of princely fruit display;
A tree that bears a noble Duke,
The Alexander of his day.
Of a Manchegan gentleman
Thy purpose is to tell the story,
Relating how he lost his wits
O'er idle tales of love and glory,
Of "ladies, arms, and cavaliers:"
A new Orlando Furioso—
Innamorato, rather—who
Won Dulcinea del Toboso.
Put no vain emblems on thy shield;
All figures—that is bragging play.
A modest dedication make,
And give no scoffer room to say,
"What! Álvaro de Luna here?
Or is it Hannibal again?
Or does King Francis at Madrid
Once more of destiny complain?"
Since Heaven it hath not pleased on thee
Deep erudition to bestow,
Or black Latino's gift of tongues,
No Latin let thy pages show.
Ape not philosophy or wit,
Lest one who cannot comprehend,
Make a wry face at thee and ask,
"Why offer flowers to me, my friend?"
Be not a meddler; no affair
Of thine the life thy neighbours lead:
Be prudent; oft the random jest
Recoils upon the jester's head.
Thy constant labour let it be
To earn thyself an honest name,
For fooleries preserved in print
Are perpetuity of shame.
A further counsel bear in mind:
If that thy roof be made of glass,
It shows small wit to pick up stones
To pelt the people as they pass.
Win the attention of the wise,
And give the thinker food for thought;
Whoso indites frivolities,
Will but by simpletons be sought.

AMADIS OF GAUL
To Don Quixote of la Mancha
SONNET
Thou that didst imitate that life of mine
When I in lonely sadness on the great
Rock Peña Pobre sat disconsolate,
In self-imposed penance there to pine;
Thou, whose sole beverage was the bitter brine
Of thine own tears, and who withouten plate
Of silver, copper, tin, in lowly state
Off the bare earth and on earth's fruits didst dine;
Live thou, of thine eternal glory sure.
So long as on the round of the fourth sphere
The bright Apollo shall his coursers steer,
In thy renown thou shalt remain secure,
Thy country's name in story shall endure,
And thy sage author stand without a peer.

DON BELIANIS OF GREECE
To Don Quixote of la Mancha
SONNET
In slashing, hewing, cleaving, word and deed,
I was the foremost knight of chivalry,
Stout, bold, expert, as e'er the world did see;
Thousands from the oppressor's wrong I freed;
Great were my feats, eternal fame their meed;
In love I proved my truth and loyalty;
The hugest giant was a dwarf for me;
Ever to knighthood's laws gave I good heed.
My mastery the Fickle Goddess owned,
And even Chance, submitting to control,
Grasped by the forelock, yielded to my will.
Yet—though above yon horned moon enthroned
My fortune seems to sit—great Quixote, still
Envy of thy achievements fills my soul.

THE LADY OF ORIANA
To Dulcinea del Toboso
SONNET
Oh, fairest Dulcinea, could it be!
It were a pleasant fancy to suppose so—
Could Miraflores change to El Toboso,
And London's town to that which shelters thee!
Oh, could mine but acquire that livery
Of countless charms thy mind and body show so!
Or him, now famous grown—thou mad'st him grow so—
Thy knight, in some dread combat could I see!
Oh, could I be released from Amadis
By exercise of such coy chastity
As led thee gentle Quixote to dismiss!
Then would my heavy sorrow turn to joy;
None would I envy, all would envy me,
And happiness be mine without alloy.

GANDALIN, SQUIRE OF AMADIS OF GAUL,
To Sancho Panza, squire of Don Quixote
SONNET
All hail, illustrious man! Fortune, when she
Bound thee apprentice to the esquire trade,
Her care and tenderness of thee displayed,
Shaping thy course from misadventure free.
No longer now doth proud knight-errantry
Regard with scorn the sickle and the spade;
Of towering arrogance less count is made
Than of plain esquire-like simplicity.
I envy thee thy Dapple, and thy name,
And those alforjas thou wast wont to stuff
With comforts that thy providence proclaim.
Excellent Sancho! hail to thee again!
To thee alone the Ovid of our Spain
Does homage with the rustic kiss and cuff.

FROM EL DONOSO, THE MOTLEY POET,
On Sancho Panza and Rocinante
ON SANCHO
I am the esquire Sancho Pan—
Who served Don Quixote of La Man—;
But from his service I retreat—,
Resolved to pass my life discreet—;
For Villadiego, called the Si—,
Maintained that only in reti—
Was found the secret of well-be—,
According to the "Celesti—:"
A book divine, except for sin—
By speech too plain, in my opin—

ON ROCINANTE
I am that Rocinante fa—,
Great-grandson of great Babie—,
Who, all for being lean and bon—,
Had one Don Quixote for an own—;
But if I matched him well in weak—,
I never took short commons meek—,
But kept myself in corn by steal—,
A trick I learned from Lazaril—,
When with a piece of straw so neat—
The blind man of his wine he cheat—.

ORLANDO FURIOSO
To Don Quixote of La Mancha
SONNET
If thou art not a Peer, peer thou hast none;
Among a thousand Peers thou art a peer;
Nor is there room for one when thou art near,
Unvanquished victor, great unconquered one!
Orlando, by Angelica undone,
Am I; o'er distant seas condemned to steer,
And to Fame's altars as an offering bear
Valour respected by Oblivion.
I cannot be thy rival, for thy fame
And prowess rise above all rivalry,
Albeit both bereft of wits we go.
But, though the Scythian or the Moor to tame
Was not thy lot, still thou dost rival me:
Love binds us in a fellowship of woe.

THE KNIGHT OF PHŒBUS
To Don Quixote of La Mancha
My sword was not to be compared with thine
Phœbus of Spain, marvel of courtesy,
Nor with thy famous arm this hand of mine
That smote from east to west as lightnings fly.
I scorned all empire, and that monarchy
The rosy east held out did I resign
For one glance of Claridiana's eye,
The bright Aurora for whose love I pine.
A miracle of constancy my love;
And banished by her ruthless cruelty,
This arm had might the rage of Hell to tame.
But, Gothic Quixote, happier thou dost prove,
For thou dost live in Dulcinea's name,
And famous, honoured, wise, she lives in thee.

FROM SOLISDAN
To Don Quixote of La Mancha
SONNET
Your fantasies, Sir Quixote, it is true,
That crazy brain of yours have quite upset,
But aught of base or mean hath never yet
Been charged by any in reproach to you.
Your deeds are open proof in all men's view;
For you went forth injustice to abate,
And for your pains sore drubbings did you get
From many a rascally and ruffian crew.
If the fair Dulcinea, your heart's queen,
Be unrelenting in her cruelty,
If still your woe be powerless to move her,
In such hard case your comfort let it be
That Sancho was a sorry go-between:
A booby he, hard-hearted she, and you no lover.

DIALOGUE
Between Babieca and Rocinante
SONNET
B.  "How comes it, Rocinante, you're so lean?"
R.  "I'm underfed, with overwork I'm worn."
B.  "But what becomes of all the hay and corn?"
R.  "My master gives me none; he's much too mean."
B.  "Come, come, you show ill-breeding, sir, I ween;
'Tis like an ass your master thus to scorn."
R.  He is an ass, will die an ass, an ass was born;
Why, he's in love; what's plainer to be seen?"
B.  "To be in love is folly?"—R. "No great sense."
B.  "You're metaphysical."—R. "From want of food."
B.  "Rail at the squire, then."—R. "Why, what's the good?
I might indeed complain of him, I grant ye,
But, squire or master, where's the difference?
They're both as sorry hacks as Rocinante."

DEDICATION OF PART I
TO THE DUKE OF BEJAR, MARQUIS OF GIBRALEON, COUNT OF BENALCAZAR AND
BANARES, VICECOUNT OF THE PUEBLA DE ALCOCER, MASTER OF THE TOWNS OF
CAPILLA, CURIEL AND BURGUILLOS

In belief of the good reception and honours that Your Excellency
bestows on all sort of books, as prince so inclined to favor good arts,
chiefly those who by their nobleness do not submit to the service and
bribery of the vulgar, I have determined bringing to light The
Ingenious Gentleman Don Quixote of la Mancha, in shelter of Your
Excellency's glamorous name, to whom, with the obeisance I owe to such
grandeur, I pray to receive it agreeably under his protection, so that
in this shadow, though deprived of that precious ornament of elegance
and erudition that clothe the works composed in the houses of those who
know, it dares appear with assurance in the judgment of some who,
trespassing the bounds of their own ignorance, use to condemn with more
rigour and less justice the writings of others. It is my earnest hope
that Your Excellency's good counsel in regard to my honourable purpose,
will not disdain the littleness of so humble a service.
Miguel de Cervantes